=== chapter 11 · gazette page 116 · pdf page 1 ===
11 Structural Safety and Quality Control
11.1 Structural Design and Safety
For any building under the jurisdiction of these regulations, the structural design shall be carried out
by registered/ licensed engineer/ structural engineer as specified in Chapter-14 of these regulations.
The structural design of different building elements shall conform to the relevant Indian Standards
provided in Part 6 ‘Structural Design’ of NBC 2016 comprising of the following sections:
a) Section 1- Loads, forces and effects
b) Section 2- Soils and foundations
c) Section 3- Timber and bamboo
d) Section 4- Masonry
e) Section 5- Concrete
f) Section 6- Steel
g) Section 7- Prefabrication systems, building and mixed/composite construction.
h) Section 8- Glass and glazing
Requirements specified in the following Indian Standards, Codes and guidelines and other documents
needs to be observed for structural safety and natural hazard protection of buildings etc:
a) For General Structural Safety
1) IS: 456:2000 “Code of Practice for Plain and Reinforced Concrete.
2) IS: 800-2007 “Code of Practice for General Construction in Steel.
3) IS: 801-1975 “Code of Practice for Use of Cold Formal Light Gauge Steel Structural
Members in General Building Construction.
4) IS 875 (Part 2):1987 Design loads (other than earthquake) for buildings and structures Part2
Imposed Loads.
5) (Reference to Table 4.1- “Occupant Load” may be considered for design load) 5) IS 875 (Part
3):1987 Design loads (other than earthquake) for buildings and structures Part 3 Wind Loads.
6) IS 875 (Part 4):1987 Design loads (other than earthquake) for buildings and structures Part 4
Snow Loads.
7) IS 875 (Part 5):1987 Design loads (other than earthquake) for buildings and structures Part 5
special loads and load combination.
8) IS: 883:1994 “Code of Practice for Design of Structural Timber in Building.
9) IS: 1904:1986 (R 2005) “Code of Practice for Structural Safety of Buildings: Foundation”
10) IS 1905:1987 “Code of Practice for Structural Safety of Buildings: Masonry Walls.
11) IS 2911(Part 1): Section 1: 2010 “Code of Practice for Design and Construction of Pile
Foundation Section 1.
(b) For Cyclone/ Wind-storm Protection
12) IS 875 (3):1987 "Code of Practice for Design Loads (other than Earthquake) for Buildings
and Structures, Part 3, Wind Loads"
13) Guidelines (Based on IS 875 (3)-1987) for improving the Cyclonic Resistance of Low-rise
houses and other building.
(c) For Earthquake Protection
14) IS: 1893 (Part 1,2,3,4) "Criteria for Earthquake Resistant Design of Structures"
116

=== chapter 11 · gazette page 117 · pdf page 2 ===
15) IS:13920-2016 "Ductile Detailing of Reinforced Concrete Structures subjected to Seismic
Forces - Code of Practice"
16) IS:4326-2013 "Earthquake Resistant Design and Construction of Buildings - Code of Practice
(Second Revision)"
17) IS:13828-1993 "Improving Earthquake Resistance of Low Strength Masonry Buildings -
Guidelines"
18) IS:138271993 "Improving Earthquake Resistance of Earthen Buildings- Guidelines"
19) IS:13935-2009 "Seismic Evaluation, Repair and Seismic Strengthening of Buildings -
Guidelines”
(d) For Protection of Landslide Hazard (for protection of earth at different levels)
20) IS 14458 (Part 1): 1998 Guidelines for retaining wall for hill area: Part 1 Selection of type of
wall.
21) IS 14458 (Part 2): 1997 Guidelines for retaining wall for hill area: Part 2 Design of
retaining/breast walls.
22) IS 14458 (Part 3): 1998 Guidelines for retaining wall for hill area: Part 3 Construction of dry
stone walls.
23) IS 14496 (Part 2): 1998 Guidelines for preparation of landslide – Hazard zonation maps in
mountainous terrains: Part 2 Macro-zonation.
Note:
Whenever an Indian Standard including those referred in the National Building Code, the latest
revision of the same shall be followed except specific criteria, if any, mentioned above against the
provisions of that code.
11.2 Structural Design Basis Report (SDBR)
The SDBR (Appendix-14) consists of basis for designing the building. It includes four parts as provided
below:
a) Part 1: General information/data
b) Part 2: Load bearing masonry buildings
c) Part 3: Reinforced concrete buildings
d) Part 4: Steel buildings
In compliance of the design with the relevant Indian Standards mentioned in NBC 2016, the registered/
licensed engineer/ structural engineer/ principal design consultant shall submit a SDBR for structures
of different complexities, as given in paragraph 11.3 of this guidelines, along with the drawings and
documents to be submitted with the application. The SDBR shall include the parts as detailed below:
a) Part 1
b) Part 2, Part 3 or Part 4 (whichever is applicable)
SDBR shall be submitted to the LTP in accordance with Chapter-14 of these byelaws.
11.3 Review of Structural Design
The Authority shall empanel structural engineers for peer reviewing/proof checking and certifying the
design of buildings with height above 50 m, important service and community buildings or structures,
lifeline and emergency buildings and/or large assembly buildings. The owner may also decide to carry
117

=== chapter 11 · gazette page 118 · pdf page 3 ===
out proof checking of structural design for other buildings, provisions of IS 18299:2023 shall be
adopted.
NOTE — Important service and community buildings or structures may include critical governance buildings,
schools, signature buildings, monument buildings. Lifeline and emergency buildings may include hospitals,
telecommunication buildings, bus stations, railway stations/buildings, airports, ports, food storage, power stations,
fuel stations, fire stations, etc.
The peer reviewer/proof checker shall have the minimum qualification, experience, and competence as
per IS 18299:2023:
The submission of the structural design by the structural engineer to the peer reviewer/proof checker
shall be done in three stages as given below, and the succeeding stage submission shall be made only
after obtaining concurrence for the preceding stage:
a) SDBR
b) Preliminary design, related drawings and documents
c) Detailed design, related drawings and documents
11.4 Quality Control and Safety during Construction
All material shall be of good quality conforming to relevant Indian Standards (BIS certified) as given
in Part 5 ‘Building Materials’ of NBC 2016. All workmanship shall also be of good quality conforming
to relevant Indian Standards as given in Part 7 ‘Construction Management, Practices and Safety’ of
NBC 2016. Alternative building materials and construction technology may also be adopted with the
approval of the authority in compliance with NBC 2016.
There should be a clearly defined competence requirement for the workers based on the work-related
peculiarities. Workers in a project should be adequately qualified, trained, experienced and competent.
A formal training or a certified course undertaken should be a preferred selection criterion for the
workers. All efforts should also be made to impart on site skilling/training of construction workers for
specific tasks. A periodic review of the performance may be made to establish the nature of training
required and methods for imparting training.
Safety during construction shall be ensured in accordance with Part 7 ‘Construction Management,
Practices and Safety’ of NBC 2016.
11.5 Periodic Evaluation of Buildings
In case of high-rise buildings and special buildings, the owner of the building shall get the building
structural audit/ inspection done by the registered/ licensed structural engineer/empanelled expert
structural engineer first in the tenth year from the date of grant of occupancy permit, and thereafter in
every 5 years. Findings shall be submitted to the Authority for record. In case the building shows signs
of distress such as structural cracks, etc the owner may opt for conducting such evaluation immediately.
For buildings of height more than 50 m and special structures, the evaluation shall be done by expert
structural engineer only.
If any action for ensuring the structural safety and stability of the building is to be taken, as
recommended by the registered/ licensed structural engineer/ empanelled expert structural engineer, it
shall be completed within the time period as stipulated by the Authority to maintain the occupancy.
The owner on the advice of the Authority shall carry out such repair/restoration and strengthening/
retrofitting of the building found necessary as per paragraph 11.6 (seismic strengthening/retrofitting)
of these regulations, so as to comply with the safety standards.
In case, the owner does not carry out such action, the Authority or any agency authorized by the
Authority may carry out such action at the cost of the owner.
118

=== chapter 11 · gazette page 119 · pdf page 4 ===
11.6 Seismic Strengthening/Retrofitting
If as per periodic evaluation, the seismic resistance is assessed to be less than the specified minimum
seismic resistance as given in the concerned Indian Standards listed in table below, action shall be
initiated to carry out the upgrading of the seismic resistance and other structural requirements of the
building as per the provisions of standards given in the table.
Table - Indian Standards for Seismic Evaluation and Strengthening of Buildings
Provisions in the Indian Standard, IS 18289 ’Post - earthquake safety assessment of buildings –
Guidelines’ should be followed for the following building typologies to ascertain whether or not a
building affected during an earthquake can be occupied immediately after the earthquake:
a) Unreinforced masonry load-bearing buildings; and
b) RC moment frame buildings with unreinforced masonry infill walls.
11.7 Format for Structural Design Basis Report (SDBR)
a) This report shall accompany the application for Building Permit.
b) In case information on items (iii), (x), (xviii), (xix) and (xx) of Part 1 of SDBR cannot be
given at this time, it should be submitted at least one week before commencement of
construction.
c) In case of reinforced concrete framed buildings, a certificate to the effect that the Part-3 of the
report will be completed and submitted at least one month before commencement of
construction, shall be submitted with the application for Building Permit. In addition to the
completed report, the following additional information shall be submitted, at the latest, one
month before the commencement of construction.
1) Foundations
i. In case raft foundation has been adopted, indicate K value used for analysis
of the raft.
ii. In case pile foundations have been used, give full particulars of the piles,
type, diameter, length, capacity.
iii. In case of high-water table, indicate system of countering water pressure, and
indicate the existing water table, and that assumed to design foundations.
2) Idealization for earthquake analysis
i. In case of a composite system of shear walls and rigid frames, give
distribution of base shear in the two systems on the basis of analysis, and that
used for design of each system.
ii. Indicate the idealization of frames and shear walls adopted in the analysis
with the help of sketches.
119

--- table 0 (5 rows × 9 cols) ---
[#D9E2F3] | Sl. | [#D9E2F3] | [#D9E2F3] | Type of Buildings | [#D9E2F3] | [#D9E2F3] | Indian Standards | [#D9E2F3]
1 |  |  | Masonry Buildings |  |  | IS 13935 ‘Seismic evaluation, repair and strengthening of masonry buildings’ |  | 
2 |  |  | Concreter Buildings and Structures |  |  | IS 15988 ‘Seismic evaluation and strengthening of existing RCC buildings - Guidelines’ |  | 
3 |  |  | Low strength masonry buildings |  |  | IS 13828 ‘Improving earthquake resistance of low strength masonry buildings – Guidelines’ |  | 
4 |  |  | Earthen Buildings |  |  | IS 13827 ‘Improving earthquake resistance of earthen buildings – Guidelines’ |  | 

=== chapter 11 · gazette page 120 · pdf page 5 ===
3) Submit framing plans of each floor and in case of basements, indicate the system used
to contain earth pressures.
d) The latest version of the Indian Standards with their amendments as indicated in the SDBR
template given in Appendix-14, shall be referred for the preparation of the report.
11.8 Requirements for earthquake resistant construction
11.8.1 Applicability
(i) Earthquake-proof construction requirements will be applicable to buildings with more than 3 floors
including ground floor or more than 12 meters in height and all infrastructure facilities with land cover
of more than 500 square meters. (Such as water works and overhead tanks, telephone exchanges, bridges
and culverts, power generation centres and power sub-stations and power towers, hospitals, photo
galleries, auditoriums, assembly halls, educational institutions, bus terminals, etc.)
(ii) For the development of buildings and important infrastructure facilities mentioned in paragraph (I)
above, it will be mandatory to adopt 100% of the provisions of Code of Practice of BIS, National
Building Code, other relevant guidelines and records mentioned in Chapter-11.1 of the byelaws.
11.8.2 Certificate required for construction permit.
(i) To get the map approved for building construction, architectural plan as per the pre-determined
procedure, along with which the relevant parts of the details (related to the drawing) mentioned in the
“Building Information Schedule” will be marked on the map in the form of a table on the format given
in Appendix-8 and a certificate to this effect will be submitted on the format given in Appendix-9 with
the joint signatures of the land owner/builder, the architect who prepared the map and the structural
engineer who prepared the structural design of the foundation and superstructure of the building that in
the building plan and design of foundation and superstructure, all the provisions related to earthquake
resistance, the provisions of the above mentioned codes, guidelines and other relevant records have
been 100 percent complied with. Apart from this, complete calculations and structural maps of the
foundation and superstructure design of the building signed by the structural engineer will also be
submitted along with the forms related to map approval. Also, the maps which will be sent to the
authority appointed for the construction of the building, on all those plans, a certificate of earthquake
resistant design will be submitted in the format mentioned in Appendix-10 with the full name and sealed
signature of the land owner/builder, registered/ licensed architect as well as the structural engineer doing
the structural design and the service engineer preparing the service design.
(ii) If any changes/additions are made in the building map presented for approval after testing by the
designated authority, then necessary changes in the anti-earthquake provisions in the structural and
services design will be made again by the structural engineer and the map will be presented again for
approval.
In which the relevant part of the certificate and building information schedule will be mentioned as per
above and the execution of building construction works will be ensured as per the finally approved map.
11.8.3 Conditions for construction permission
Approval for building construction will be issued subject to the following conditions:
(a)
The proposed construction will be as per the design certified by the Civil Engineer and Architect in
accordance with the provisions of the relevant Indian Standards Institute and National Building Code.
(b)
The supervision of the construction will also be done under the supervision and responsibility of the
architect/engineer and the developer so that compliance with the following safety related arrangements
can be ensured:-
120

=== chapter 11 · gazette page 121 · pdf page 6 ===
I. A site civil engineer with prescribed experience will be assigned to supervise the construction of the
building. During supervision, it will be specifically ensured that the building is being constructed as per
the design approved by the structural engineer for making all the arrangements for structural safety and
anti-earthquake.
II. To ensure the quality of the main construction materials cement, steel, stone grit, brick coarse sand
and mortar and concrete mix, etc. that will be used in the construction of the building, it will be
necessary to have the facility to test them at the work site itself. Also, by regularly sampling the
construction materials, their quality should be physically and chemically tested by authorized
laboratories/institutions and their test results should be available at the site itself, so that whenever an
expert goes to the site to inspect the works, so can see these test results too.
III. Random technical inspection of the construction work will also be done by an independent expert.
The construction work can also be inspected from time to time by experts appointed by the
buyer/allottees. In this regard, action will be taken as per the instructions issued from time to time.
(c)
If any of the conditions of approval are not followed or the report of the inspecting technical expert
is not satisfactory, then further construction work will be stopped and the construction work will be
considered unauthorized and may also be sealed. In such a case, completion certificate will not be
issued, and the builder and his assistants will be considered guilty of criminal laxity and legal action
will be taken accordingly.
(d)
A board of size 4 feet x 3 feet shall be installed at a prominent place at the work place. On which
the name of the builder and owner, the name of the architect, structural engineer, service design engineer
and supervision engineer will be mentioned in such a way that it can be clearly read from the main road
adjacent to the building. The following records will also be available at the work site related to
construction work: -
(I)
Signed and sealed copy of the map approved by the appointed authority.
(II)
Complete report of soil testing done by the approved laboratory/institute and recommendations
regarding provisions of the proposed foundation.
(III)
Calculations of foundation, superstructure and all maps and structural details related to structural
safety to make the building earthquake resistant, signed and sealed by an authorized structural engineer.
(IV)
All working drawings including sections and elevations and services details etc. signed and sealed
by the authorized architect.
(V)
Details of all T&P required for the construction of the building.
(VI)
Site Engineer Inspection Report Register.
(VII)
Material testing report and related register.
(e)
After completion of construction, no use of the building or its part will be made, nor will it be
allowed, without obtaining the completion certificate.
Note:
In addition to the above, the appointed authority may prescribe other conditions as necessary.
11.8.4 Completion Certificate
(I) To obtain completion certificate from the land owner/builder, along with the application form to be
submitted to the competent authority, a certificate to this effect will be given jointly by the concerned
architect, site engineer, land owner/builder on Appendix-11 that the building has been constructed with
121

=== chapter 11 · gazette page 122 · pdf page 7 ===
the specifications, quality and structural design approved by the structural engineer based on the Indian
Standards Institute code, National Building Code and relevant guidelines mentioned in Chapter-11.1 of
the byelaws as per the approved map and with all anti-earthquake provisions and the building is safe
for use in every way. The officer issuing the completion certificate will ensure that along with all other
formalities related to issuing the completion certificate, the security related certificate is also available
in the prescribed format. Only after this, completion certificate will be issued.
(II) If any building or any part thereof is put into unauthorized use or is likely to be used without
obtaining completion certificate, such construction will be sealed and strict action will be taken against
the building owner/builder as per rules.
11.8.5 Determination of qualifications
a) On the basis of construction work and earthquake resistant zone, the qualifications of Structural
Engineers, Site Civil Engineers for site supervision and Expert Inspectional Civil Engineers for
surprise inspection of work during construction work will be as per paragraph 14.7 (Chapter-
14) of these regulations.
b) Post Graduate Structural Engineer mentioned in the said Appendices means, Graduate Degree
in Civil Engineering from a recognized Technical Institute/University with Graduate Civil
Engineer with Post Graduate Degree in Structural Engineer means Graduate Degree in Civil
Engineering from a recognized technical institute/university or equivalent recognized technical
qualification. And Diploma Civil Engineering means Diploma in Civil Engineering from a
recognized technical institute/university.
122
